# Forest_Fire_Surveillance_Optimization_Model
Optimizing the Surveillance Path of Sensor-Equipped Drones for Early Wildfire Detection in the State of Arizona

Introduction 
As shown throughout history, wildfires are a critical factor that emphasizes our climate is unsteady and destructive to life and the environment, yielding economic costs between $394 billion to $893 billion annually in the United States [1]. Wildfires present a severe societal concern not only due to the significant loss of property involved and its intense characteristics but also its impact on air quality, crops, resources, transportation, and the livelihood of animals and local populations. Posing a serious threat to the natural balance of ecosystems and global climate change, wildfires spread rapidly and are often abrupt, challenging to control and regulate, and difficult to initially locate and recognize. For wildfires, the likelihood of occurrence and corresponding strength depend on several factors, including weather conditions, vegetation characteristics, wind speed, precipitation, and topography [2]. In Arizona particularly, the extreme temperatures and dry conditions yield highly flammable plants and crops, causing many regions to be susceptible to wildfires. This makes Arizona the fourth most at-risk state for wildfires in the United States in 2023, based on the number of properties facing extreme risk [3]. Considering such factors, Arizona is an appropriate state candidate for wildfire analysis and the development of an effective surveillance plan for early wildfire detection. In addition to its devastating effects supplemented by land and weather conditions, wildfires can be challenging to detect within a certain time period before it reaches its deadly, uncontrollable climax. Wildfires are fundamentally characterized by distinguishable features, particularly flames and smoke. However, as flames of wildfires are typically hidden at the initial stage, smoke is the only observable attribute in detecting early wildfires [4]. Therefore, the development of an early wildfire surveillance model to promptly detect wildfires in the state of Arizona and effectively mitigate the corresponding widespread devastation on local communities and environmental habitats is of upmost importance. 

Problem Description 
Two primary factors must be addressed in the case of a wildfire: the time elapsed between the fire’s ignition and the arrival of firefighters and the assessment of the fire’s magnitude to determine the necessity of an emergency intervention. Firstly, this response time must be minimized to ensure the fire can be effectively contained and controlled. Secondly, as manual wildfire assessment is expensive, dangerous, and challenging due to limited visibility, more effective firefighting and wildfire evaluation strategies that consider such factors must be developed and adopted. As such, having both an accurate, reliable, and safe wildfire surveillance system is essential to minimize catastrophic losses and the scale of wildfire destruction. Among various preventive measures, remote sensing-based early detection system is one of the fundamental methods for wildfire surveillance. These systems can quickly analyze and pinpoint potential wildfires, enabling rapid stabilization practices without exposing humans to hazardous conditions. Traditionally, satellite imagery [5] and wireless sensor networks [6] have been used for wildfire detection and risk assessment. However, both types of systems have their limitations. As satellite imagery has limited resolution, the collected data are often averaged over pixels, making it difficult to precisely pinpoint a fire’s location and size [7]. In addition, smoke emitted from the fires and the extensive distance between such satellites and the wildfires can significantly affect its effectiveness and its detection response time. For wireless sensor networks, as such sensors must be installed in forests and deployed beforehand, their coverage and functions are contingent upon the level of investment in their acquisition and setup [8]. Furthermore, the sensors are vulnerable to malfunctions or destruction during wildfires, yielding additional costs for maintenance or replacement [8]. Due to the limitations of conventional systems, sensor-equipped drones have emerged as a more practical and economic solution for early wildfire detection. These drones are capable of flying over designated areas to collect relevant data in real-time using their advanced sensors. As such, their enhanced maneuverability, autonomy, ease of deployment, and cost-effectiveness make them a highly advantageous technology in this field.  

Objective and Decisions 
Developing an effective and efficient wildfire surveillance model requires the consideration and balancing of various factors. As such, the objective of this project is to develop a linear programming model to determine the optimal surveillance plan of sensor-equipped drones for early wildfire detection, focusing specifically on the state of Arizona. Given a set of drones and nodes evenly distributed throughout the state to represent the possible flight locations for drones, the developed model will determine the optimal surveillance route plan and optimal recharging amount during each time period for each drone. The model focuses on optimizing several key factors: it maximizes the total average wildfire risk coverage, the total area covered, and the total distance traveled by drones, while simultaneously minimizing the recharging costs throughout all time periods. These factors are evaluated within specified constraints, including limited drone availability and strict time limitations. Drone limitations were imposed on the model to account for budgetary constraints, while time limitations were imposed to ensure timely wildfire detection and response, preventing the wildfire from escalating beyond control. By accounting for these these factors, the proposed surveillance model aims to significantly mitigate the devastating impacts of wildfires, protect natural environments and properties, and facilitate quicker, safer wildfire management operations. 
